You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor Dr. Bob McCartney.
Let's open our Bibles this morning to Ecclesiastes chapter five.
All right.
We're going to talk about money this morning.
Immediately some of you feel uncomfortable.
Solomon is going to move us to what I'm going to refer to.
And I think Solomon would have agreed as the money mirage.
Um, in 2022, the power ball lottery reached an epic number that it has never reached since of a $2 billion payout.
It was over 2 billion.
On the night of the drawing, there was one winning ticket that had been sold in the state of California.
The winner chose to remain anonymous, so we have no idea who that was.
But around the coffee pot and break rooms and across the table at lunches, people were talking about that.
Everybody was talking about that.
And it was essentially, can you imagine?
I mean, can you imagine, what could you do with $2 billion?
And in order to sound very, very, you know, scriptural Christians would say, well, you know, I'd give a big chunk to my church.
You know, of course, yeah, that was your first thought.
And I'm thankful for that.
But people would say, can you imagine never having to worry again?
I mean, if you had that kind of money, you just wouldn't have to have any worries.
Can you imagine the freedom that that would bring?
If you wanted to take a trip to Australia, you just get on your private jet and go.
I mean, the freedom that that would bring you to have that much money.
Can you imagine?
being secure, with two being secure for the rest of your life forever, and succeeding generations would be secure, right?
However, people who study, and there have been numerous studies done, of those who have a large windfall, like a lottery win or a huge inheritance that comes into their life, those sort of people have a higher than normal bankruptcy rate.
They blow it all.
more family fractures, divorces, children who are strange from their parents, families get at odds with one another, they are at greater risk for addiction.
And of course, there are constant legal disputes.
If someone trips on the sidewalk outside your house, they sue you.
Sometimes there are frivolous lawsuits, people just hoping you settle and give them some money because you've got all this money.
Most people who win that kind of money have to have a permanent lawyer on retainer to deal with all of the legal matters.
So the truth is that money doesn't bring peace.
Most of the time it brings pressure.
Now Solomon is going to explore this in some depth in this passage of scripture.
And what I want to say to you is if you are a person who doesn't have much money, you need to listen to this.
If you would say, you know what?
I find myself kind of on the lower end of the spectrum.
You need to listen to this because there is a temptation for you to think if I get some more, everything's going to be all right.
Those of you who are like in high school or those of you are in college, I realize that most of you don't have like a full time employment, maybe have a part time job, but there's going to come a time when you're going to get a job.
We all hope and become a productive contributing member of society.
And when that happens, you need to know some of this stuff.
You need to tuck away some of this truth from God's Word in your heart because this is gonna be important as you go forward.
It really will be.
But to those of you who, if you're sitting here and you're not gonna raise your hand, I'm not gonna ask you to, but let's say that you make an above average income.
Maybe you own a business, you're prosperous.
God bless you for that.
We're thankful for that.
But you need to hear from Solomon.
Because let me tell you something, Solomon was the richest man on planet earth at that time.
And there are some who might say that if you, you know, weighed apples to apples from today's wealth versus what Solomon had, he'd be the richest man who ever lived.
The Bible says that Solomon's income was six over 600 talents of gold every year.
600 talents of gold.
In today's prices, if you do the math, works out somewhere between 1.4 and 1.6 billion dollars a year.
Now that's just the goal that he took in.
Because the Bible says that he also got money from trade, he made money.
in trading partners, and he got money from tariffs, and he got money from taxes, and there was these other sources of income that came his way.
We don't really know how wealthy Solomon was.
We know a couple of things.
The Bible says that gold was so plentiful in Israel at that time that silver became as common as stones.
Silver.
If you watch markets or anything like that, you know that silver is soaring in price right now There's some reasons for that that I'm not gonna go into in a sermon But it's still a pretty valuable commodity not as valuable as gold, but he says it's kind of like stones on the ground There was this queen who came to visit Solomon and she wanted to see his wealth and she wanted to hear his wisdom because She had heard that it was just absolutely fabulous and tremendous and she records
that when she went, not only did she find that it was not exaggerated because, you know, we'd think, wow, maybe that's exaggerated.
Not only was it not exaggerated, the Queen of Sheba said the half had not been told.
That's amazing.
Solomon is an authority on this subject of money, of wealth.
Now, I'm not, but listen to Solomon and listen to God's word.
And he starts with an unusual thing.
We're gonna get to the money, I promise.
But he starts with something unusual.
It almost seems out of place.
But he's going to tell us first of all about the root of the problem.
And the root of our problem with money is what I'm gonna refer to as misordered worship.
Look at verses one and two.
Guard your steps when you go to the house of God.
better to approach in obedience than to offer the sacrifice as fools do, for they ignorantly do wrong.
Do not be hasty to speak and do not be impulsive to make a speech before God.
God is in heaven and you are on earth, so let your words be few."
He says, when you approach God, guard
your steps.
He begins with our attitude toward worship, which is really, it's kind of interesting to me.
I wanted to dig in on this and here's what Solomon is trying to help us to understand, that a casual approach to worship will always result in distorted priorities.
There's this moment in the Old Testament even before Solomon when
Moses has grown up in Egypt.
He finds out he's actually an Israelite.
He tries to do God's will his way.
He kills an Egyptian and then he has to flee from Egypt.
He goes out and he becomes the assistant shepherd to a guy named Jethro.
He didn't even own the sheep.
He just attended his father-in-law's sheep and he marries his daughter.
And there's this one day when 40 years later, he's out in the desert and just trying to find pasture and water for the sheep.
And he looks over and sees this bush and it's burning.
But the bush doesn't burn up and the fire doesn't spread.
I mean, wildfires were something that a shepherd had to keep their eye out for.
And so he's watching that bush is burning.
It's not consumed.
And he gets close to this bush to see what this is.
And there is a voice that comes from the bush.
a burning bush that doesn't burn up, it doesn't spread, and a talking bush.
That's different.
And the voice from the bush says, do not come closer.
Remove the sandals from your feet for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
That might have been what Solomon had in mind when he thought,
Guard your steps when you approach the house of God you are coming into the holy presence of God and for Solomon He's built the temple this is Solomon later in life And so he's already constructed the temple and for him that was going up to the temple of God and what Solomon realized was that when worship becomes casual
Not our dress, but our worship becomes casual when we're not focused on God, when we're constantly staring at our cell phones and thinking and saying we're listening to the sermon or that we're singing.
When worship becomes casual, substitutes will become central.
Zach S. Wine has written a book called Recovering Eden.
And it's actually about Ecclesiastes.
And here's his premise.
He says in Eden, we had security.
We had provision and we had joy, Adam and Eve, humanity.
They had security and joy and provision.
They were provided for well.
There was joy and they were completely secure.
And then Adam and Eve sinned and fell into sin and the creation was warped and fractured.
And now what we try to do is recover that joy and security and provision.
You see that joy, security and provision in Eden was in a relationship with God.
Ecclesiastes is all about how we try to have joy and provision and security without God.
And we do that by making substitute gods.
And money is primary on that list.
So Solomon then moves us into what I'm gonna call four money myths.
This morning, this is really the heart of the message.
This morning, we're gonna talk about some false beliefs that we have about money.
They are rampant.
They are present in our culture today.
Even though Solomon writes this 2,900 years ago, these things are
are still believed by people today.
And we're gonna confront four money myths, and then I'm gonna write you four checks.
They are reality checks, however, you can't cash them.
And we're gonna talk about what the truth is.
So let's move into this.
Money myth number one, or A, more money will satisfy me.
This is the first money myth
Not that I'm tackling, but that Solomon does.
Look at verse 10.
The one who loves silver is never satisfied with silver.
And whoever loves wealth is never satisfied with its income.
This too is futile.
Whoever loves silver, whoever loves wealth, that's really,
Solomon is driving at in this verse.
One of the most often misquoted verses in the entire Bible goes like this.
Money is the root of all evil.
That is not what the Bible says.
It's not.
The Bible does not say money is the root of all evil.
Paul writes in 1 Timothy 6-10, for the, say it out loud, love of money is the root of all kinds of evil.
And by craving it, some have wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs.
It is the love of money.
And that's what Solomon is driving at here.
It is the love of silver that will never satisfy.
It is the love of wealth that will never be satisfied with its income.
When you put money as the top priority, when you make wealth, the driving force of your life, you will never be satisfied.
I read this week something, I didn't even know these people existed.
There are a group of people called behavioral economists, and they study the way people behave with money, without money, the way money makes people act, and it's quite a fascinating field
Um, really, but here's one of the things that they talk about that behavioral economists call hedonistic adaptation that you don't have to remember that.
That won't be on a test, but here's what they mean by that.
You've got a job.
You have an income.
You go in one day and your boss says, you're doing a great job.
We want to keep you in our company.
And so we're going to give you a significant raise.
You're thrilled.
This is incredible.
I mean, they give you a big raise and you are overjoyed by this big raise.
And so your income goes from here to here and then you're going to, you're going to do okay.
And then your lifestyle choices begin to change and that income level now doesn't become something you're joyful over.
It becomes something that's normal.
And after a while, after a while, not only are you not thrilled with it, you become dissatisfied with it unless you get another raise.
You see, those who love money will never be satisfied with it.
Money is not a satisfier and especially not of your soul.
Our abundance in life is not found in abundant wealth.
Jesus said in Luke chapter 12 verse 15, watch out and be on guard against all greed because one's life is not in the abundance of his possessions.
He who dies with the most toys does not win.
He leaves all his toys behind.
And I'll get to that a little bit later.
B, or I'm sorry, I didn't give you the, I didn't write you the check.
I promised I would.
Here's the reality check.
money will never satisfy my deepest needs.
The longing of your soul cannot be satisfied with stuff, with money or the stuff that money can buy.
Number two or B, I think in the outline, more money will solve my problems.
There are some people I'm telling you, I've talked to them who really believe
They would say something like, if I just had $100,000, I wouldn't have any problems.
You can write any amount of money in that you want.
If I just had this amount of money, I wouldn't have any problems.
I've actually had people say that to me.
Look at verse 12, verse 11.
When good things increase, the ones who consume them multiply.
What then is the profit to the owner except to gaze at them with his eyes?
He says, when wealth multiplies, my obligations and my dependence multiply.
Proverbs 14 20 says, but those who, those who love the rich are many.
They gather an entourage back in the early nineties.
There was this guy who was a pioneer in rap music.
Now, some of you weren't born then, so I'm going to have to educate you on good rap music.
But if I say, it's Hammer Time.
Some of you know who I'm talking about.
I mean, MC Hammer was a creative genius.
And he did something that was really amazing.
Rap music had almost specifically been the domain of black artists and the black community.
and mc hammer made it mainstream and his songs became like number one hits and his dance moves were incredibly creative and he was making like over forty fifty million dollars every year for several years and so he gathered around him an entourage he had assistance and he had a personal hairdresser and fashion people and he had
because his costumes were kind of interesting and he had security, of course, you got to have security if you got that much money.
And a lot of those people, interestingly enough, were family and friends who were not even qualified to do the job he was paying them to do, but he's paying them.
And then rap music changed.
Taste changed.
Music became a little bit different.
More graphic and MC Hammer was a follower of Jesus and he wouldn't go there and so his popularity went down.
and the money went down, but that hundred people that he had on his personal staff were still standing there just like this with their handout.
He had to declare bankruptcy at one point in his life because when good things increase, the ones who consume them, consume them, multiply.
That's just an amazing reality.
Money does not shrink my problems.
It scales them.
Let's say you have, you start a business, you're an entrepreneur, you start a business, and your business is successful.
Let's say it's a taco shop, and you're selling tacos, and everybody loves tacos, and on Tuesday you nearly sell out every week, okay?
Taco Tuesday.
And you're doing so well, you think, you know what, I'm gonna start a second taco shop.
Well, you've got to have a manager for the second taco shop.
You got to have more workers at the second taco shop.
But it succeeds too.
And then you've got a third and a fourth.
And pretty soon you're like doing really well in the taco business.
And then you got to think about, I've got to start providing insurance for my employees.
And I want to keep my manager.
I need a 401K retirement plan for them.
And when good things increase, those who consume them increase.
See, money doesn't shrink your problems.
It scales them.
Don't be deceived by thinking that money somehow is going to make your life simpler.
Here's the reality check.
Money usually complicates matters.
See, money myth number three, more money
will give me peace of mind.
If I just had this amount of money in the bank, if I just had this amount of money in my retirement account, if I just had this amount of money, I would be, I'd have peace of mind.
I'd feel like everything's gonna be okay.
Look at verse 12.
The sleep of the worker is sweet.
Whether he eats little or much, but the abundance of the rich
permits him no sleep.
And when Solomon used the word worker here, he was referring to someone who was a day laborer.
Many people in the ancient world that Solomon is talking about here, they didn't have like a job that they went to every single day.
If it was time for the wheat harvest, you would hire laborers to go out and reap the wheat harvest and you'd pay them each day.
Well, if it was time for the grape harvest, which didn't happen at the same time of year, so those same workers, they'd go work in a vineyard somewhere and pick the grapes.
And you'd give them a day's labor.
They would work from sun up to sun down.
They'd be exhausted at the end of the day.
And the sleep of the worker is sweet because he's exhausted.
But the abundance of the rich permits him no sleep.
I read an article where Elon Musk said that in the
Beginning days of Tesla during what he called the crisis years He kind of gotten the company up and running but they were trying to figure out some things and to make make this you know the electric car Work and go many miles and so you don't have to recharge it so often and he said that there were nights That he never went home He was already very rich very wealthy There were nights that he never went home and he slept on the factory floor for two or three hours He'd get back up and go to work
The richest man in the world sleeping on the factory floor.
The abundance of the rich permits him no sleep.
Why?
He's not thinking about what he has to gain.
He's thinking about what he has to lose.
Worry and anxiety sweeps into his life.
Money does not give him a sense of peace of mind.
It brings pressure.
An abundance of why wealth does not reduce anxiety.
It will usually produce anxiety.
In 2021, Dak Prescott signed what was at that point, the biggest contract that Dallas Cowboys had ever given anybody, $160 million contract.
The season starts that fall and Dak did not play well.
And he's throwing interceptions and they're not winning football games.
And he talked openly about his mental health and the anxiety and the pressure that he felt.
I mean, come on, I am a Dallas cowboy fan and let's just all be honest, we're delusional.
And we would say when you pay somebody that much money, we have high expectations, expectations increase and anxiety increases.
And we all think, man, to make that kind of money, but you don't want to bear that kind of burden.
Reality check number three, more money means more worries.
Most of the time.
Jesus tells us about worry in Matthew chapter six.
Matthew chapter six, verse 25, he says, I tell you, don't worry about your life, what you will eat or what you will drink or about your body, what you will wear.
Isn't life more than food and the body more than clothing?
And then skip down to verse 33 in Matthew 6.
But seek first the kingdom of God.
Don't seek wealth first.
Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness.
And all these things will be provided to you.
Therefore,
Don't worry about tomorrow because tomorrow will worry about itself each day has enough trouble of its own.
Jesus says if you will focus on God, if you will make Him your top priority, then He will rightly order all the other things.
But when you put a thing at the top of the list, everything else gets disordered.
When God is put in His right place
everything else will fall into place.
It is true.
Number four, more money will secure me.
In verse 13, Solomon writes, there is a sickening tragedy.
Now this is, that's a really bold statement.
He says, I have seen under the sun,
wealth kept by its owner to his harm.
In other words, he didn't give, he wasn't generous, he didn't let things flow through him.
He didn't understand not everything comes to me is for me.
Sometimes what comes to me is to flow through me to others.
Wealth kept by its owner to his own harm.
That wealth was lost then in a bad venture.
So when he fathered a son, he was empty handed.
He had nothing to pass down
to his son as he came from his mother's womb so he will go again, naked as he came he will take nothing for his efforts and that he can carry with his hands.
He tells us in this part of the passage that you came into this world with nothing and you are going to leave with exactly the same.
No matter how much money you make or how much money you lose in this life, you leave it all behind.
He says, this is a great tragedy that I saw.
This guy, he stored up all this money.
And then he lost it in a bad venture and now his son, all the stuff he worked for, his son doesn't even have anything, he doesn't have an inheritance.
He said, I've watched as people put their hope and try to find their security in money.
A security built on accumulation will collapse.
At least it'll collapse when your heart stops beating.
Jesus told the story.
about a man who, his wheat fields produced abundance of grain.
And he had all of this wealth and his barns were just overflowing with the grain that he had.
And without even a thought of generosity, he says, I know what I'll do.
I will build bigger barns.
That's what I'll do.
So it'll hold all of my abundance.
And in the parable, the man says,
I'll sit back and say to myself, my friend, you have enough.
You have enough stored away for years to come.
Now take it easy, eat, drink and be merry.
But God said to him, you fool, you will die this very night.
Then who will get everything you worked for?
Here's the reality check number four and it is the main point.
My only real security is in God.
I don't know if the channels that you watch on TV show these, but for some reason I see them all the time.
I'm told by William Devane that I need to buy gold to secure my future.
Others are telling me you need to buy silver to secure your future.
I'm going to tell you that security is not found in gold or silver.
Now make good financial choices.
Save?
Sure.
But saving is different than finding your security in something.
And my security is in God and God alone.
And Solomon has gone through all of these things.
And then at the very end of this, there's a term.
There's something really different at the end of the chapter.
Skip down to verse 18.
Solomon says this.
Here is what I have seen to be good.
Oh, Solomon, richest man who ever lived, incredible wealth.
He says, let me give you a little advice.
Here's what I've seen to be good.
It's appropriate to eat, drink, and experience good in all the labor one does under the sun during the few days of his life God has given him because that is his reward.
Furthermore,
Everyone to whom God has given riches and wealth, he has also allowed him to enjoy them, take his reward, rejoice in his labor.
This is the gift of God.
Here's Solomon's point.
Money as a gift is great.
Money as a God is
absolutely repressive.
When your money, the money that you have, whatever amount that is, is seen as a gift, you're able to be generous and enjoy it.
After all, if you see your money as a gift, then it was given to you and it's a little easier to give it to others in need or to give it to kingdom causes, to advance the gospel.
If you see it as a gift,
If you see it as a God, you have to hang on to your God.
You gotta grab onto that, not let it go.
But if you see it as a gift, it's also easier to enjoy.
Fast forward to the New Testament.
The apostle Paul is writing advice to his young protege, Timothy, and he says, instruct those who are rich in this present age
not to be arrogant or to set their hope on the uncertainty of wealth, but on God, who richly provides us with all things to enjoy.
There is nothing wrong with enjoying the things that God has allowed us to be given, the gifts that he has provided us.
There's absolutely everything beautiful and wonderful about enjoying that to the glory of God.
But when you make the pursuit of the gift and not the pursuit of the giver, your priority, you will always end up disappointed.
All of us, every single one of us has been driving in a car,
on a hot, dry West Texas day on some flat road and you look out in front of you and you would swear that road is wet.
It glistens.
There's water on the road up there.
I just know it.
And you get there and it's dry as a ball, right?
It's a mirage.
And that's what the pursuit of money always
winds up with.
It evaporates.
It's gone.
It wasn't there to start with.
There is no joy.
There is no provision.
There is no security apart from a relationship with the one true living God.
It is all a mirage that will leave you empty.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wigital Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations,
Click the link in the show notes or go to fbcwf.org.
We'll see you next week.